---
layout: post
title: Swift, Objective-C, and nil
---

##Nothing

Objective-C has never really been happy with the concept of nothing. It uses C's type system, exposing the bare layout of the computer's memory as sequences of bits in an otherwise somewhat high-level object-oriented language. Most types are objects, which are passed around as pointers. And, as we know from C, these pointers are just numbers pointing at sections of memory. Occasionally Cocoa exposes a few structs like `NSRange`, enums like `UIApplicationState`, or bitmasks like `UIViewAnimationOptions`. C concerns itself with the pushing and pulling of these chunks of bits and leaves us software developers to give the bits meaning. And we, as humans who do math, have decided to let zero represent the absence of value. Since then [zero has been called `nil`, `NULL`, and `Nil`](http://nshipster.com/nil/) in a handful of different places, and chances are if you've had Xcode open for more than five minutes you've seen one of these.

## Problems

Was this a good idea? As it turns out, `nil` already gives us a few problems. There's no way to disambiguate between a `NSInteger` that happens to be zero or a `NSInteger` that doesn't exist, since they're both represented by zero. If we're dealing with something like a resizeable array, we might use `nil` to indicate where our array's contents end and the nonsense garbage memory beyond begins. In this case we won't be able to insert `nil` into our array without marking the insertion point as the end of the array. Collections from Foundation won't let us insert `nil` at all, choosing death by assertion failure over the corruption of their internal data structures. With `NSMutableDictionary`, we now have the strange case where returning `nil` when queried is valid but inserting `nil` is not. To make things even more confusing, [`setValue:forKey:` _won't_ crash if inserting `nil`](https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/Cocoa/Reference/Foundation/Classes/NSMutableDictionary_Class/#//apple_ref/occ/instm/NSMutableDictionary/setValue:forKey:), but [`setObject:forKey:` will](https://developer.apple.com/library/mac/documentation/Cocoa/Reference/Foundation/Classes/NSMutableDictionary_Class/#//apple_ref/occ/instm/NSMutableDictionary/setObject:forKey:).

```objc
NSMutableDictionary *dict = [NSMutableDictionary dictionary];
dict[@"hello?"];           // returns nil
dict[@"goodbye!"] = nil;   // crashes, probably
```

This is something Cocoa folk get used to very quickly because dictionaries are used everywhere and the assertion failure message is relatively straightforward. What if we want to indicate somehow that a number doesn't exist? We can use `NSNumber` and awkwardly box and unbox values everywhere. If we stick with our `NSInteger` type, we have no choice but to set aside a special value to represent the absence of value. No matter what value we choose, we won't be able to disambiguate between that value and the absence of value, so we'd better choose a value that isn't common or we'll have ambiguity problems everywhere. Zero is too common to use for this purpose. Cocoa chooses this to be `NSIntegerMax` and calls this special value `NSNotFound`. But now we have a problem where our nothings are not equal.

```objc
NSNotFound == nil; // NO
```

When allocating an object, Objective-C will set the contents of the object to `nil` so us software people don't have to fiddle with garbage data. This is an entirely sensible default, but if we have an object containing integers, all of those integers will be set to something that isn't `NSNotFound`. By default, our integers will exist as zero while everything else will be absent. As it turns out, this is rarely a problem in practice. However, Objective-C method calls will all return `nil` if sent to a `nil` pointer, so if we're returning integers and expecting `NSNotFound` when something doesn't exist we might get behavior that doesn't make sense. Here's [some code from Realm's codebase](https://github.com/realm/realm-cocoa/blob/869f74e6f1d7ad260b48d61342554a423b4ac7ef/Realm/RLMSwiftSupport.m#L23).

```objc
+ (BOOL)isSwiftClassName:(NSString *)className {
    return [className rangeOfString:@"."].location != NSNotFound;
}
```

If `className` is `nil`, we have problems.

```objc
[RLMSwiftSupport isSwiftClassName:nil]; // returns YES
```

Even with nullability annotations this code struggles. Objective-C can't tell the difference between a type that can never be `nil` and a type that is allowed to be `nil` sometimes.

```objc
NSString *__nonnull className = NSStringFromClass([SFSafariViewController class]);

// Returns YES in iOS 8, NO in iOS 9.
[RLMSwiftSupport isSwiftClassName:className];
```

Objective-C struggles with this a lot.

```objc
NSNumber *empty;
[empty integerValue];       // 0
[empty doubleValue];        // 0
empty.doubleValue == 0      // YES
[empty isEqualToNumber:@0]; // NO

NSString *nothing;
[nothing integerValue];                       // 0
[nothing stringByAppendingString:@"not nil"]; // nil
[@"not nil" stringByAppendingString:nothing]; // crash
[nothing isEqualToString:@"not nil"];         // NO
[@"not nil" isEqualToString:nothing];         // crash

MassiveViewController *viewController;
[viewController performSideEffects]; // nothing happens
```

String addition and equality are crashy and no longer commutative, everything returns zero, side effects are not performed. Often code in which this happens will handle the ensuing results correctly on accident, which works great until all of a sudden something changes and the code suddenly doesn't work anymore.

Somehow, our pile of problems continues to grow. Because ObjC enums are just special names for integers, they don't have a good way of representing `nil` either. We can add special cases in our enums for when something doesn't exist and make those zero so that they'll equal `nil`, but then we're forced to handle the possibility of nothing even when we know that we have something. These special cases usually have names like `MSCSomethingSomethingUnknown`. Foundation enums do _not_ have these special values, because it's really strange to have a handful of cases each representing one possibility and then a single case representative of all other possibilities. If anything, that special case should be handled separately outside of any switch statement that handles the rest. However, if we insist on having these special values, we can get away with only minor inconvenience by having an empty case statement in our switch, or we can commit great evil and give up on exhaustiveness either by lying to the compiler or by adding a `default:` statement. If we do the latter, the compiler will not warn us when we add a new case to our enum. There is no need to abandon the compiler. It is our friend, and it wants to help us.

Every once in a while we may encounter the solitary `NSNull` singleton. It is not extremely harmful, but it isn't `nil`, so it must be accounted for separately. Due to its singleton nature, we can simply check for equality with the `==` operator. It appears occasionally in serialized JSON dictionaries to cause unrecognized selector crashes.

In summary, we have problems because everything in C can be zero and `nil` is just another name for zero. Some types already have meaningful names and uses for zero, in which case we must use something else to represent nothingness. Foundation collections do not allow for the insertion of `nil` or non-object types, so we need yet another way to represent it. We can never separate `nil` from our types because our types are all just numbers and zero is a valid number.

##Solutions

In Swift, the possibility of nothing is indicated by the `Optional` type (and its relative `ImplicitlyUnwrappedOptional` that I won't talk about), which is simply an enum with two cases. `nil` itself is a literal for `Optional.None`. And rather than being just another name for zero, `Optional.None` is a representation of the concept of nothing.

```swift
enum Optional<Wrapped> {
    case .None
    case .Some(Wrapped)
}
```

`nil` no longer has any strict physical representation. Instead, `nil` can be a literal declaration for any adopter of the `NilLiteralConvertible` protocol.

```swift
/// Conforming types can be initialized with `nil`.
public protocol NilLiteralConvertible {
    /// Create an instance initialized with `nil`.
    public init(nilLiteral: ())
}
```

The concept of nothing is sort of a black hole from which no meaning can be gleaned. Things can become `nil`, but `nil` cannot become things in a meaningful way. To do so would be literally making something out of nothing, which only works in movies. Consequently any initializer from `nil` should practically write itself.

```swift
extension Optional : NilLiteralConvertible {
  public init(nilLiteral: ()) {
      self = .None
  }
}
```

`Optional` is a generic type, which means we can create entirely new types by taking existing concrete types and applying the Optional _type constructor_. `Optional` by itself cannot be used, but we could apply it to an `Int` to get `Optional<Int>`, a concrete type representing either an integer or nothing. We no longer have to sacrifice individual values in our type to represent nothing. Optionals can be added to collections, negating the need for `NSNull`. Similar to the `Optional<Int>` example, we can create optional enums and have two distinct types for when an value definitely exists and when it might not. Optionals can be handled in a switch statement just like any other enum, allowing us to handle `nil` as the special edge case that it is.

Swift lets us declare optionals in a much less verbose way using a postfix `?` so we don't have to type out `Optional` every time.

```swift
let maybe: Int? = /* ... */

// Xcode insists on this sort of indentation.
switch maybe {
case .Some(let unwrapped):
    switch unwrapped {
    case 0:
        print("zero is not nil")
    case NSIntegerMax:
        print("this isn't nil either")
    default:
        print("a non-zero number!")
    }
case .None:
    print("nil is a special snowflake")
}
```

Swift's `guard` and `if let` bindings make this even nicer.

```swift
func printValue(optionalValue: Value?) {
    guard let value = optionalValue else {
        print("(null)")
        return
    }
    
    print(value)
}

func printValue(optionalValue: Value?) {
    if let value = optionalValue {
        print(value)
    } else {
        print("(null)")
    }
}
```

Swift optionals solve all of our problems in an elegant way. When we create optional types, we create entirely new types that preserve the original types within. `Wrapped?` is a new type that is one space bigger than `Wrapped`, so we don't need to pick a special value to represent `nil`. Swift's standard library magic prevents optionals from breaking collections, which is a benefit we get for free. If `nil` breaks any other method out there, we can just change the method signature to take a non-optional type and Swift's type checker will error at compile time if we try to pass that method an optional. And because optionals are the only way to represent `nil`, this essentially eliminates all unexpected `nil` runtime problems.

With optionals in mind, there is one last way of expressing nothing that I want to mention. When working with collections, empty collections are usually good ways to represent an absence of value because most collection logic is already well-equipped to handle empty collections. If those collections were optionals, the collection logic consuming those optionals would have to handle emptiness and `nil` separately, even if they are representative of the same thing. On the other hand, things like strings should be left as optional values even though the empty string exists because people tend to not parse strings on a character-by-character basis.

The ability to represent nothing is really useful and important. Swift's single unified representation of nothing makes dealing with the absence of value much easier and much more deliberate--we can choose the possibility of runtime crashes, but we don't have to.


_If you have any questions or comments, feel free to [reach out to me on twitter](https://twitter.com/morganchen96)._
